If you're the first one to predict a
bubble, um, you probably were wrong
because it went up a whole lot before it
went down. And so getting the timing of
these is just much much harder than
knowing that eventually there probably
will be one.
[Music]
Is the AI economy a bubble? Are we just
in the early moments of a technological
revolution? Vidia's stock price exploded
from $14 in 2022 to over $180 today,
turning early believers into
millionaires. An artificial intelligence
boom pushes investors to pour money into
the stock market.
>> Or are we overextended and headed for a
crash? And if we are watching a bubble
inflate right now, what should the
government or for that matter the
individual investor do about it? My
guest today has a lot of bubble
experience. He was an economic adviser
in the Clinton White House when the.com
boom imploded. And then he worked for
President Obama in the aftermath of the
housing bubble and the crash of 2008.
Today he's a Harvard economist and a
contributing writer for New York Times
Opinion.
Jason Ferman, welcome to Interesting
Times.
>> Great to be with you. So Jason, we're
going to talk about the economy as a
whole and even the long-term future of
American growth. But I want to start in
the place where a lot of Americans
thoughts about the economy start, which
is with my own stock market portfolio. I
had this moment a few months ago when uh
Open AI rolled out its latest version of
chat GPT and there was sort of a general
disappointed reaction and you had people
who had been AI skeptics
uh finally claiming vindication saying
look the AI revolution is not delivering
as fast as was hoped. And in that moment
I went in and looked at my very boring
mix of mutual funds and index funds.
looked at just how fast it had risen in
the era of the AI boom and thought to
myself, man, seems like I'm invested in
what might be a bubble. And a lot of
Americans have had this thought, I
think, in the months and weeks since
then. You've had a lot of talk about how
large AI and AI related companies loom
in the stock market. And I want to start
there. just how big a part of growth
right now is artificial intelligence and
everything associated with it.
AI is an enormous part of our
macroeconomy right now. And there's two
ways to think about the economy. One is
demand. That's the amount of stuff
you're buying. The other is supply. Um
how much you're producing. Right now AI
is really showing up on the demand side.
It's building those data centers, buying
those microchips. And you know, by my
estimate in the first two quarters of
this year, 92% of the increase in demand
in the US economy was due to just two
categories in GDP. One called
information processing systems and the
other called software. Ultimately
though, what we're really hoping for is
that AI shows up on the supply side of
the economy, actually helping us do more
with less. And certainly some of that is
happening, but there hasn't been
anything particularly special about
productivity growth to date.
>> So just to stay on that, the point you
just made about how much of growth and
expansion is driven by AI. Now that that
doesn't mean right that absent AI data
center investment and everything else
economic growth would be zero, right?
>> Yeah, that's right. I don't think we'd
have as much growth absent AI, but we'd
have a different type of growth. So, a
bunch of that AI demand is coming in the
form of imports because those chips are
being produced abroad which don't add to
GDP. Absent the AI boom, I would expect
that we would have lower interest rates
right now because so much capital is
being siphoned up by the enormous
demands um in this sector. If that
weren't happening, there'd be a little
bit less pressure on the economy. The
Fed would be cutting rates faster. And
what does that mean? We'd have more
activity in other sectors like home
building and manufacturing. So the AI
boom is partly adding to the economy and
partly crowding out other activities.
And just as a really sort of wild rough
guess, that might be 50/50. So half of
growth due to the AI boom and then the
other part of the AI boom is crowding
out what would have been other sources
of growth that we could have had if we
didn't have this.
>> And then something similar is happening
in the stock market, right? Can you can
you tell listeners what are the
Magnificent Seven?
>> The Magnificent Seven are seven enormous
um tech companies, companies like Amazon
and Microsoft that represent a very
large fraction at this point of the S&P
500 and a very large very large fraction
of the increase um in the S&P 500. So if
one is wondering why the stock market
has risen, you're largely talking about
why are the MAG 7 worth so much more
today than they were a year and a half
ago.
>> And why are they worth so much more
today than they were a year and a half
ago?
>> It's because of all this expectation of
what their profits will be um in the
future. Now there's some differences
between the different companies. Um, a
company like Apple is a little bit
closer to buying a utility where every
year they're going to come out with a
new phone. Every year they're going to
sell a bunch of those phones and you buy
it and you're just sort of guaranteeing
that cash. So there's a little bit less
expectation um of growth there. But for
a company like Meta, a lot of their
value is based on the expectation that
they're going to figure out something
about AI and that they will also figure
out how to make a profit out of that
something um from AI to justify these
valuations. You need really both of
those both the breakthroughs will happen
but also that the breakthroughs will
generate a profit. But all of these
companies generally are themselves
profitable, right? The companies that
look more like classic startups, right?
Are the companies that are just doing AI
research and development, right? And
most of those are not publicly traded.
So you're not looking at like
ridiculously high stock market
valuations for these companies, but they
do have extremely high valuations in
some in some sense. Can you talk a
little bit about those companies? Yeah,
open AI for example is worth hundreds of
billions of dollars, but it's pretty
hard to buy a share in it. It's not
publicly traded. That's just the
valuation you get when you know they get
new investors from venture and
elsewhere.
One sense that's enormous. I mean that
you know Goldman Sachs has been built up
over a century and open AI which was
built up over the last decade is more
valuable than Goldman Sachs. you know on
the other hand of the world is using
open AI um is using chat GPT um and
that's just amazing uh five years ago
basically 0% of the world was using it
and now 10% of the world is using it now
a much smaller percentage of the world
is actually paying for CH GPT and that's
the big question is one is six seven and
8 going to be you know a continued
things like iPhones have become where
there's small design changes and the
camera gets better or are they going to
be you know profound changes in the way
that three and four were we don't know
the answer to that and then second and
this gets back to the issue I was
talking about before it's not just that
you need the innovation it's that you
also need to be able to profit from the
innovation and if you know large
language models become like a commodity
where there's three of them that are
absolutely amazing, but they're
basically all the same. It's very hard
to price a commodity at something higher
than the marginal cost of delivering
that service. And so, they won't make a
profit. They won't justify their
valuations if they can't figure out how
to build what's often called a moat, a
way of delivering something unique,
sticky. You know, people once they're in
the Apple ecosystem, they tend to stay
in the Apple ecosystem. Is it going to
be the case that if you're in the chat
GPT ecosystem, you can stay there?
>> How much of this I know this is a the
the impossible question, right, for the
economists, but how much of this is just
vibes?
>> Psychology definitely is a big driver in
markets. There's something enormous
going on here. This is not Pets.com.
Pets.com was part of the.com bubble. It
had barely any revenue, barely any
business plan, and yet had, you know, a
pretty high valuation. Um, these are
companies that already have, um, quite
high revenue,
enormous numbers of customers, enormous
upside, and then how do you quantify all
of this? Well, you add the genuinely
large thing with some vibes, and maybe
that's where we we are today. And in
terms of historical comparisons, is
there any model from American history or
modern history of a single form of
technological investment playing this
kind of role in the economy or in an
economic expansion? So on the demand
side, railroads were probably larger at
various points in time in the 19th
century where just enormous amounts of
the economy was being devoted to, you
know, laying track as well as building
railroads. We're at roughly a similar
scale of where we were in the late 1990s
and early 2000s with uh the fiber
buildout, broadband that was an actual
real economy demand side. um activity
and there's probably some other things
um in between that have been at similar
scale. So we've often had you know
whether it's the automobile or
electricity or airplanes or the personal
computer one thing that was playing a
disproportionate role. Um in many of
those cases that one thing did turn out
to be a bubble but uh not in every one
of those cases. Well, and the pattern so
with railroads and I guess you could say
the same thing with the internet, right?
The pattern seemed to be there was a
bubble in the sense that people got
overextended
building out infrastructure before it
had a path to profitability.
But in the end, they were right to build
the infrastructure, right?
>> Yeah. Yeah. So, by the way, on railroad,
you actually want to say railroad
bubbles because it burst over and over
again in the United States, in the UK,
in continental Europe, and my guess is
in lots of other countries um around the
world. So, they just kept making the
same mistake of, you know, overbuilding
track, maybe building duplicative track.
Um but yeah, when it all settled out, um
the railroad was enormously
transformative. The internet was
enormously transformative. Radio was
another thing which was a bubble um that
was enormously transformative and I
don't have an exact tally but I think
there probably have been
more bubbles of things that were
actually real actually big than these
just totally fantastical unproductive
ones.
>> Okay. So play play bubbles advocate for
me right now. If you wanted to make the
case that this is what we're looking at
right now, that AI is a railroad style
productive bubble where the tech is real
but we're just overinvested and
overbuilt. What would that argument look
like? Well, first I'd look at the market
as a whole. And Robert Schiller, who won
a Nobel Prize for his work on ways in
which markets could turn irrational,
developed a concept called the cyclally
adjusted price earnings ratio or cape.
The Schiller Cape right now stands at
about 40 which says the price of a stock
is 40 times the inflationadjusted
average earnings over the last decade.
Um that 40 is the second highest that
the Schiller measure has ever gotten and
it goes back about 150 years. Um the
first highest was where it got in early
2000 right before the tech bubble burst.
So the basic standard first thing that
financial market people, economists look
at to assess the value of the stock
market right now is screaming that it is
skyhigh in a way um that has never
lasted before. So that would be number
one. Um number two would then be to dig
into certain companies and go through
you know just what would have to happen
to um justify their valuations. And if
it's a really small startup to say their
revenue is going to double every year
for the next decade, fine. That
definitely happens sometimes. But when
you already are a big established
company and you're being priced a little
bit more like a startup, um, you know,
what's the plausibility of that when it
requires both the technology to work and
you to need to figure out how to profit
from that technology? You mentioned
earlier that you don't think we're
seeing in productivity data and other
statistics evidence that AI uptake, the
use of AI in, you know, programming or
whatever else is having a fundamentally
transformative effect yet. Yet, and the
yet is a really important part. If
you're a business and you go out and
hire 20 people to figure out how to
integrate AI into your, you know, small
business or medium-sized business or
large business, you know, whatever it
is, and they're all out there trying to
figure out how, you know, the chain of
stores that you run or the chain of
restaurants or something can use AI. the
people you hire, if they don't figure it
out right away, they actually show up in
the data as lower productivity because
you basically have more people working
in that business and it's not producing
a higher output. Now, that doesn't mean
it's a mistake to hire those people.
They may well figure it out and five
years from now you can replace all sorts
of people or get all sorts of higher
profits or whatever it is and the
productivity will show up. But in
economics, this is called a J curve
where sometimes you go down before you
go up. And I think that's happening in
some companies right now that in a sense
AI is actually reducing their
productivity because they're busy
figuring out how to use it, but they
haven't yet figured out how to use it.
So in some sense, it's not that
surprising to me that we're not seeing
the productivity growth from AI yet. I
do expect that we'll see some but it is
an open question as to how much we'll
see
>> right and that would be again in the
argument that for a bubble right you
would say that if you have sort of
overextension
extraordinary overextension of
investment and you're in the downward
part of the J curve that makes a bubble
scenario more likely.
Yeah, I think that would be um in the
case for a bubble and and productivity
isn't the only thing that matters. Um we
actually had more productivity growth
from 2000 to 2005 than we did from 1995
to 2000. So even after the bubble burst,
even after this investment was
collapsing, productivity growth was
actually very very strong, it just
wasn't nearly strong enough to justify,
you know, the way in which those
companies were valued um in the year
2000. Um I should also say as an
economist, productivity growth actually
is almost everything I care about. It
tells you what the size of your economy
is. It tells you sort of on average what
wages will be, our possibility for the
future. So to me, that's what I'm most
focused about and care the most about.
But definitely for the stock market,
it's just um one input,
>> right? And what about just to be more
anecdotal, there's been a fair amount of
coverage in the last few weeks of these
deals where effectively the AI companies
are paying each other and increasing
each other's valuations through these
through sort of deals with one another
where one company agrees to buy another
company's chips and in return it gets
you know I guess shares in that company.
I may be misrepresenting this slightly,
but gets shares in that company and then
its decision to purchase chips from that
company drives that company's share
price higher. So the money that it uses
to buy the chips, it's effectively
getting from the increase in the share
price of the company it's investing in,
right? Like does that to you seem like
the kind of thing that happens in bubble
environments where it's sort of
companies you know sort of hyping each
other up or is that more sort of I guess
more just sort of what you would see
normally in an environment where a bunch
of companies are working together
closely and are growing quickly.
>> So like everything here unfortunately
there's two sides to this and I wish I
could come down for you firmly on one
side. No, no, you don't. I'm I'm going
to ask you for the case the case against
a bubble in a moment
>> on this being a bubble. It's the opacity
of these arrangements that would make
one the most nervous. Um, and also, I
guess, the circularity of them. You
know, there was an old phrase that in a
gold rush, the way you could guarantee a
profit is being the person that sold the
picks and shovels to the miners. And the
idea was the person went off to find
gold. Maybe they found it and got rich.
Maybe they found nothing. and ended up
poor, but you were guaranteed money if
you sold them the picks and shovels.
Well, right now, instead of selling them
the picks and shovels, you're in some
sense lending them the picks and shovels
and telling them that you'll be repaid
if they actually strike gold. So, Nvidia
would be the one, you know, with the
picks and shovels and Open AI would be
the one going off looking for gold,
right? Um,
>> Nvidia is making is making the chips.
>> Yeah, Nvidia is making the chips. That's
like a real actual thing. It's like a
pick and a shovel, but a little bit more
sophisticated and complicated
>> to make. And if they were selling them
all for basically cash, you'd say
they're pocketing that money, but in
some sense, they're now not just selling
them for cash. It's essentially almost
as if they're lending them to Open AI,
and they'll get paid back. And they'll
get paid back with multiples if um AI
Open AI succeeds. But if it doesn't,
then you know they won't get any money
or won't get as much money as they would
have gotten um for selling those picks
and shovels. So it's it's
>> so in the gold rush economy even if
there's less gold at Suitor Mill or
where you know or in the Klondike or
wherever else than people thought at
least if you're an investor the pick and
shovel money is going to prop you up.
Whereas here, if there isn't if there
isn't enough gold out there, your
investment in the pick and shovel
company is also in deep trouble.
>> Yeah. And this is something that's
changed. You know, 6 months ago, I'd say
Nvidia was the pick and shovel company
that was guaranteed to lock something
in. Um now, now that's changed and
they're not getting all the money up
front for selling those picks and
shovels to people. Um then the second
part of this is just the opacity of it.
We have in our economy different ways
for a company um to get money. One is
you sell sell a bond and bond holders
buy it. That's a way of lending you
money. A second is you go to a bank and
the bank is super careful about, you
know, who they'll lend money to because
they're incredibly highly regulated.
And the third is you go to what are
sometimes called shadow banks. Um, these
are companies like Apollo
and they lend you money often with fewer
questions asked. They themselves face
less regulation and a lot of the lending
that's happening in this sector is
happening with companies like Apollo
that are shadow banks that are less
regulated. Now to date um these are
enormously profitable, enormously
successful companies. They're incredibly
sophisticated. I would for the most part
bet on know them knowing what they're
doing. But no, one has to be just a
little bit more nervous about them.
Okay. Now, argue the other side.
Tell me why this is not at all like the
railroad bubbles or the.com boom. Why
should we not be alarmed about the
Schiller index being almost as high as
it's ever been? The
biggest reason why I have frankly full
disclosure kept all of my money in
broadly diversified index funds and
haven't reduced my exposure. So in some
sense
>> we were going to come around to the
personal investment qu question. So
that's good to know.
>> Um we can come around to So in some
sense that's how I've answered this
question for myself.
>> Yeah.
>> Is I think a lot about a speech that
Alan Greenspan made in December 1996
where he said there was irrational
exuberance um in the market. There was a
lot of reason to think that the market
was pretty frothy and pretty bubbly. Um
and what happened after he gave that
speech? The stock market ended up
doubling over the next you know three
plus years. and then the bubble burst.
But if you had bought stocks when Alan
Greenspan made that remark and then you
lived through the bursting of the bubble
and sold at the very bottom of the broad
market, you still would have made money.
And that type of pattern has repeated it
over and over again throughout history
that people thought something was a
bubble, went up a whole lot before going
down. And it turns out if you call a
bubble but you're early, um that's not
very impressive. Um that actually means
that you are wrong. Um that's very
different from almost anything else.
Anything else you predict it and you're
the first one to predict it, you should
get lots of credit. If you're the first
one to predict a bubble, um you probably
were wrong because it went up a whole
lot before it went down. And so getting
the timing of these is just much much
harder than knowing that eventually
there probably will be one.
>> And so in that example you've you've
mentioned already pets.com which stands
as sort of the paradigmatic example of
the overvalued
internet company. Though honestly the
one I remember most from my college days
is Cosmo.com which I think promised
>> that was a delivery one.
>> It was a delivery one, right? And it
>> that one was awesome while it lasted.
They were just giving you almost free
stuff,
>> right? Well, I mean, what's striking
about those companies is that of course,
you know, we now have very profitable
delivery companies and we now have very
profitable, you know, pet supply
companies online, right? So, you know,
in in the long arc of history, there
were good ideas there. But yeah,
Cosmo.com, it was like, well, we're
going to deliver pizza. Oh, you don't
want pizza? Well, we'll deliver ice
cream. you know, we'll deliver like um
>> I remember getting one of the Harry
Potter books from them at midnight the
day it was released.
>> Oh, well, so there you go. Right. So you
you were the you were the benefit
beneficiary of that kind of that kind of
over excitement. Right. But to me, I
feel like we don't yet have the pets.com
and the Cosmo.com's
of this moment. Again, if I'm trying to
talk myself into the idea that it's too
early to call a bubble, you have these
big, wellestablished, extremely
profitable companies
um that are investing heavily in this,
but which are not dependent right now on
AI for all their profits, right? Um and
then you have a set of companies that
are not yet profitable, maybe never will
be profitable, but their revenue is
going up, right? the the AI companies
are on a positive trajectory overall,
would you say?
>> Oh, yeah. They're on a positive
trajectory and they're real companies
with real business models. Now, there
are hundreds of others. Many of them
have not gone public yet. Um, so-called
unicorns that are worth over a billion
dollars that don't necessarily um have
business models that people in the
venture industry are still throwing
money at them. And I'm sure, you know,
dozens of those, if not hundreds of them
will, you know, end up imploding. But,
um, you can have lots and lots of
failures along the way and it not be a
bubble. For it to be a bubble, you need
the successes to make up for the
failures. And it wasn't just that
pets.com failed. It was that the
successes, at least in the short run,
did not make up for the failures in
2000. So, you were you were in the
Clinton White House then, right?
>> Yeah, I was.
>> What were you what were you doing?
>> I was doing two things simultaneously.
Um, one of which was private and I can
be really proud of. Um, one of which was
public and is totally embarrassing. Um,
so why don't I talk about them in in
reverse order. We um were planning a new
economy conference. That's what it was
called back then to celebrate just how
awesome and transformative everything
was in this new economy. And we ended up
in late February announcing that we were
going to hold this conference in April.
I just went back and reread the fact
sheet for this announcement and I think
I probably wrote much of that fact sheet
and it was just going on about what a
high fraction of economic growth was
coming from this one sector. And isn't
it amazing? Just look at the
disproportionate investment growth, the
disproportionate GDP growth, and it's
all coming from the information
technology sector. Isn't that super
cool?
So, we announced the conference in late
February. The bubble started to burst
about 2 weeks after we announced it. And
by the time we held it in April, I think
the market was down something like
NASDAQ at least maybe one sixth um from
its high.
And you know in one respect that was
embarrassing in retrospect that we were
celebrating a new economy even as on the
financial side it was imploding. Um in
another sense though we were right in
that um productivity growth over the
next 5 years was even higher than it was
in the 5 years leading up to that. And
so in some sense it was a new economy
just not nearly as exciting as what
financial markets thought. Um so that
was the public thing. Um, in private,
the Clinton administration was running a
project that I my memory is that it was
called project nirvana in an optimist in
in an ironic type of way.
>> Okay.
>> To try to understand what would happen
if all of this fell apart and if you
know the stock market fell was one
scenario and investment collapse um was
another scenario and to see what we
needed to do to be prepared. My memory
is that we didn't actually ever get to a
real answer, but we largely reassured
ourselves that even if the bubble burst,
the macro consequences would not be very
large. And so we didn't actually prepare
anything to my knowledge other than just
to reassure ourselves that even the
downside was not so bad. And and I think
that was a good exercise that we went
through and and largely was vindicated
by what ended up being a pretty shallow
recession when the bubble burst. What do
you think will happen if this is a
bubble and it does burst or leak or
diminish?
>> Yeah. So, we've had two bubbles that
burst in the last 25 years. One was the
tech bubble and the consequences were
relatively mild.
The housing bubble was massively
devastating to the economy because it
wasn't just that house prices went down,
which mattered for families and
consumers. It was also that all the
mortgage debt had been thought to be
completely 100% safe and was used as
collateral in other lending throughout
the financial system and then all of a
sudden you found out it wasn't
completely safe and a lot of other parts
of the financial system experienced
problems um and runs. So which one is
this one like? Most of me thinks it's
more like the dot where if this bubble
bursts, it's just the stock market goes
down, people spend less, some businesses
invest less, you have a recession, but
it's not a particularly terrible one.
The one piece of it that makes me
nervous though is these um companies
like Apollo that we were talking about
before. I'd like to say that if one of
these big shadow banks failed, we would
just let it fail in a way that, you
know, we're willing to let most hedge
funds fail.
But maybe we can't. Maybe they're too
systemic. Maybe they, you know, spread
their effects throughout the economy.
And if all of a sudden you were in a
position where you were facing systemic
risk because of a largely unregulated
financial institution that was doing
hundreds of billions of dollars of
lending. If this ends up being a
problem, um that's where it is.
>> But partially how we come out of it then
depends on just the underlying health of
the economy. And
you know there's a lot of different
indicators in the air, right? And I feel
like people get give you different
assessments of the underlying state of
the economy based on, you know, jobs
numbers one day and consumer sentiment
the next day and manufacturing sentiment
the next day. And there's a lot of
disagreement with indicators pointing in
a lot of different directions. What's
your assessment of the underlying
economic situation? Yeah, so there have
been two broad disconnects in the
economic data this year.
One was for a while the so-called hard
indicators where you looked at what a
business actually did were much better
than the soft indicators where you
looked at consumer confidence or
business uncertainty or what businesses
said their plans were. Um that was true
earlier this year this disconnect
between the hard data and the soft data.
And so far it looks like the hard data
was actually vindicated. That all of the
complaints about uncertainty, all of the
lack of confidence was not something
that seems to have translated into
decisions that businesses and consumers
made. It was more like mood music around
politics. So it's like a pollster comes
to you, what do you feel about the
world? Oh, it's, you know, it's all
going terrible. I hate it. Um, but then
you go to the store and spend just as
much as what you were spending before.
So I've devalued frankly how much
emphasis I place on the importance of
uncertainty which never was very central
to the way I thought about economic
policy um but is maybe even a little bit
less now. Um the current confusion um in
the data and I should say we haven't
really gotten any government data since
the beginning of October since uh
because of the government shutdown but
the current confusion in the data is
that the labor market is slowing quite
rapidly but GDP is growing um quite
quickly and you see that in the
unemployment rate which keeps ticking
up. You see that in the hiring rate
where businesses are hiring at a rate
that you would normally associate with
recessions.
You see that in the number of jobs added
per month where we're averaging, you
know, less than 50,000 jobs a month and
it used to be 200,000 jobs a month. So,
a pretty big deterioration in the labor
market. Um, at the same time, the
economy in the third quarter, the latest
GDP tracking estimate is for growth um
above 3%.
and consumer spending is growing.
Businesses are continuing to invest. So
everything that goes into GDP um looks
quite strong. Does so I want I want to
talk about Trump administration policy
and how it might affect those numbers.
But just on that point, do you think
immigration policy has any effect on any
of these numbers? Certainly on
employment numbers. I think you've had
Trump administration officials saying,
"Uh, well, you know, you wouldn't expect
rapid job growth in an environment where
we're deporting people and lots of
people are self-epporting relative to
the Biden era." What do you make of
those kind of theories?
>> Immigration's having a large effect on
the economy. Couple years ago, we were
getting a few million people into the
country a year. Now, we don't have a
really good estimate of net immigration,
but maybe it's zero. Maybe it's 500,000.
And that means you're going to have
slower job growth. You're going to have
slower economic growth, everything else
being equal. And in some sense, I wish
there were more people in favor of
immigration restrictions. That just made
the honest argument that, you know, our
goal isn't to have the highest job
growth. It isn't to have the highest
economic growth. It's, you know, to work
better for people here in the United
States. and you know, we're going to
sacrifice on those other metrics in
order to do that. Um, just to be clear,
by the way, I'm not sure I even agree
with that argument, but that is a
coherent one.
>> Yeah, I think you you've heard that
argument from some people in the Trump
administration or people arguing for
their policies. I think obviously that's
an argument they're more likely to make
in an environment where the job numbers
are not great. if the job numbers were
great, they would just, you know, they
would just take take credit for it. Um,
what about tariffs? You wrote a essay
for the Times for us um about arguing
basically that economists to some degree
got the Trump tariffs wrong. Not in the
sense that they've proven that they were
a stroke of genius, but in the sense
that there was an expectation that they
would be totally disastrous, and they
haven't been. Where do you think that
argument stands now? It stands roughly
where it stood when I wrote that essay
um in July. I have no doubt that tariffs
have been a negative for GDP growth, a
negative for employment growth, and a
positive for inflation. Positive for
inflation also being a bad thing,
something you'd rather not have. But all
of those were, you know, maybe plausibly
been on the order of something like half
a point rather than, you know, something
catastrophic. And just to gauge things,
the economy normally grows at about 2% a
year. And so if you do this, then it
grows at 1.5% a year. Now, I think
that's a pretty bad unforced error.
Works out to be about $1,000 for every
household. And that's not a cost that as
a policy maker I would want to impose on
every household. But it's also not like
the history books are going to remember
the year growth was one and a half um
instead of two.
What what about the extent to which the
Trump administration seems to have tried
to basically
exempt or or shield artificial
intelligence from the impact of tariffs,
right? Like because that that seems to
be part of the story here as well that
that there is sort of this special zone
for AI where the kind of protectionist
agenda doesn't apply in the same way. Do
you think that's part of the story?
>> Yeah, that's certainly part of the story
is yeah, tariff rates are lower than
they were originally announced in April
and they're much lower on things like
microchips. There was going to be um an
expectation of under a national security
procedure called section 232 that there
would basically be across the board
tariffs on microchips, they were
expected to be at least 25%.
and that hasn't happened. So, they're
betting on this sector. And it's
interesting to me, if you look at the
original defense of tariffs, a lot of it
centered around restoring American
manufacturing and American manufacturing
jobs. Um, it's completely failed, at
least so far, and it's obviously still
very early. Manufacturing jobs are down.
Now, you're seeing a lot of defense of
the tariff. Some of it is revenue
raising, which part of me warms my heart
um when I hear Republicans getting
excited about tax increases, but wasn't
exactly where it started.
>> Search charges. We're call we're calling
them sir charges, Jason.
>> Search charges. I apologize.
>> Not taxes, just just search charges.
>> In the Clinton administration, we had a
plan to raise um tobacco taxes, and we
also called that a tobacco sir charge or
something like that.
So, I'm not going to get too moralistic
about um Orwellian language when it
comes to the tax code. But the second
argument that you're hearing is that the
tariffs are leading to all this inbound
investment um into the United States.
All these companies and countries are
committing to invest more in the United
States. It's still too early to figure
out whether those promises are real or
fake. But what's notable is if they come
about, it might even mean that the trade
deficit widens. So what started out as a
plan to lower American trade deficit and
revive manufacturing is turning into a
plan to increase investment into the
United States, raising the trade
deficit, and by the way, taking the main
manufactured thing and importing more of
it rather than building it here in the
United States, that being microchips. So
what will the Trump administration
do
in the event that the stock market
starts going down?
>> Well, the first thing that will happen
is everything that they criticized
previous administrations for doing both
Fed and Treasuries, you'll see them
doing them. Um because in a crisis, you
do all sorts of things that you'd rather
not do in terms of buying assets or
lending to certain parts of the economy.
Um and that sort of thing just to keep
stuff afloat. And so I doubt some of the
purity that you've heard, for example,
from Secretary Scott Bessant, who's
talked about and criticized the big
expansion of the Fed's role in the past.
Well, a lot of that expansion happened
in crisis. And I expect that he would be
a pragmatist, not an ideologue in a
crisis. And I'm sure Donald Trump would
be. In fact, we've seen him be a
pragmatist, not an ideologue, in dealing
with the financial aspects of CO in
2020.
Um second though I worry about the
government is directly inserting itself
into the sector in advance. They're
buying equity stakes in these companies
or getting things that are almost like
the equivalent of an equity stake where
they get a fraction of all of Nvidia's
uh you know export revenue. And that in
some sense says to me they are more
willing to do things for individual
companies um than you've seen in the
past. Now Bush and Obama basically
bailed out the auto industry. The theory
at the time was in the middle of a
severe economic crisis. What was
basically a liquidity crisis that was
temporary could turn into a solveny
crisis and then spread throughout the
economy and be very costly. I think
Expost they were largely justified in
bailing that industry out and much of
the money that went into it, but not all
of it was repaid.
Here, you know, in 2000, we didn't do
that. Global Crossing went bankrupt. No
one in the government tried to do
anything about the firm Global Crossing,
which is a firm building a lot of the
fiber optic cable and switching networks
and stuff like that. My guess is that
that 2000 approach would be the right
one here. I could see this
administration wanting to be much more
interventionist, especially for its
favored companies, and getting involved
with them directly in a way that sort of
gets in the way of what capitalism and
bubbles bursting are supposed to
accomplish.
>> Well, so yeah, and this is this is a
theory that I've been kicking around for
a little while. Um that's based in part
on what you describe the Trump
administration's eagerness to be in
partnerships and take ownership stakes
and so on, but it's al also based on you
know the extent to which
the vision of the AI future is deeply
entangled with issues of national
security. you know, when when you do
exercises and thought experiments about
accelerated AI timelines,
including people we've had on this show,
they tend to very quickly turn into
arguments about the new cold war with
China. And I feel like when you put
those pieces together, plus the fact
that the Trump administration has made
such a bet on AI, all of that makes me
feel like from the point of view of the
administration, maybe these companies
are already too big to fail. So
absolutely I think you do need to inject
national security into this conversation
in a way that you didn't really need to
in the bursting of the 2000 you know or
bubble or the or the housing bubble. And
there are things that are economically
costly that you want to do for national
security reasons. In fact just in normal
times for example I would subsidize chip
companies to make more advanced
microchips in the United States. Not
because I think it's a great source of
jobs in the United States, not because I
think we're good at making the
microchips, just because it terrifies me
that almost all of our advanced
microchips come um today from from
Taiwan. So, there's all sorts of costs,
economic costs you want to pay for
national security. Um I'd also say one
more thing here, which is you want to be
very targeted. So, Intel got a subsidy
under the chips program from the Biden
administration and that law was passed
with a decent number of Republican votes
as well to build microchips in the
United States. To me, that made sense
for national security but was a cost
economically. Um, this administration
has taken an equity stake in Intel. And
the problem is Intel does lots and lots
of things. And an equity stake isn't
very well targeted to that one activity
that they're not doing enough of right
now, which is building microchips in the
United States. So, it's not just that we
want Intel, it's we want Intel doing
certain things and we should be willing
to pay transparently for those certain
things. And think we have less of that
welloughtout targeting now than we had
before. And by the way, it was very far
from perfect before.
>> All right, let's do a couple of big
picture questions before I let you go.
Um,
both about both that are connected to
the unknowable aspects of the AI
phenomena, right? So
it seems to me that when when I look at
the future trajectory of growth in the
United States or Europe or the entire
developed world, there's a lot of
underlying reasons to be pretty
pessimistic, right? That you have these
societies that are aging, that have low,
sometimes extremely low birth rates,
that are running sort of permanently
large deficits. And in that environment,
sometimes it seems like we're betting so
heavily on AI because there isn't any
other bet to make and the alternative is
just sort of depressing, right? If this
technology doesn't achieve the kind of
takeoff that people imagine, then you're
just headed for a kind of global
experience like Japan from the 1990s on
of sort of stagnation and old age.
Are you optimistic about the long-term
future of the American economy?
Otherwise,
>> I'm reasonably optimistic. I mean, in
some sense,
>> why are you optimistic?
>> You know, we have had over the last 50
years, you know, nearly 2% annual
productivity growth. So every year you
basically figured out how to do 2% more
with a given amount of labor um than you
did a year before. Now that's not as
high as what we had in the 1950s and
1960s when we were coming off all of the
World War II innovations, but that's
pretty cool and impressive that no
matter how advanced stuff gets that we
keep figuring out how to squeeze out
more. I think the AI might be add on top
of that. might not even add on top of
that. It might be how we keep getting to
2% each year, but that accumulates up
and makes a difference um over time.
Second though is my optimism at the US
economy does rise and fall a lot with
what we do on immigration. Um
immigration matters both for your labor
force and how many people you have to
work, which is increasingly a challenge
for the United States were it not for
immigration. And not every country can
overcome unfavorable demographics, but
we really can with this. Um, and then
immigration also matters for that, you
know, 2% number, that productivity
growth because a lot of that innovation,
a lot of the companies we're talking
about are, you know, founded by, staffed
by, run by first or second generation
um, immigrants. So that to me, a lot of
our future does rise and fall um with
immigration. But I grant you, I would
love to see the world have more of a
growing population than it has now. And
I'd feel better about the next 200 years
if I knew either that population was
growing or um that the robots could do
everything else and we could just sit
around and
>> chat with each other on podcast.
>> On podcast. Yeah. Well, let's so let's
talk about that as the last as the last
question. That that kind of scenario.
This has been a conversation about what
normal economic models and normal
historical economic experiences can tell
us about the short-term likelihood that
we're in a bubble, what policy makers
can do, and so on. But one of the
bizarre things about AI is just this
sort of fundamental
unknowability in the tech right now that
just doesn't seem to me to have been the
case with like, you know, the
transcontinental railroad or even even
with the with the internet, right? Um
Derek Thompson, who is a fellow
podcaster and a writer on all these
subjects, right? He was going through
these arguments the other day and he
said, you know, he's talking about
Pets.com, right? And he says, "Did you
know that Pets.com delivers food,
drinks, and toys?" That was a real line
from an actual Pets.com ad. So, it
wasn't just Cosmo Pets was delivering
it, too. But he says, "You know what
they didn't say was, did you know that
pets.com will solve Alzheimer's, invent
nuclear fusion, and loosen the icy grip
of inevitable cellular death?" And it's
very easy for me to get guests on this
podcast who will make predictions like
that about AI along with the prediction
that, you know, it might well kill us
all. you know, as an economist looking
at this landscape, do you just have to
sort of set all that to one side and
just sort of narrowly focus on the
numbers in front of you and say we have
to assume this is a normal technology
until it starts to act like one that
isn't? How how do you put that into
models of our situation?
>> Well, I'll tell you how I handle it in a
class that I co-e with David Labson.
It's called ECT10. It's the principles
of economics class. And last year in our
last class, we taught the students
exactly the answer to this question. And
we gave them exactly the right answer to
this question. Um, which is to say, I
told them the future would look like the
past and we could extrapolate. David
Labson told them it would be totally
different from the past and one of us
was correct.
Do you want to know which one was
correct?
>> I I mean, yes, I suppose I do. My
argument is, you know, we've had some
big transitions. Uh, for example, you
know, in the 19th century when almost
everyone was working on when the
majority of people were working on
farms, it' be impossible to imagine what
life would be like in a world where only
a few people were able to grow enough
food for everyone. And largely the
reason the unemployment rate has stayed
the same is several things. We create
new types of jobs we couldn't have
imagined. We have more demand for old
types of jobs. A lot more people eat out
at restaurants now than did a hundred
years ago because we're richer. You
know, radiologists, um, AI is helping
them now, but there's more radiologists
than there were ever before. It's not
turning into a radiologist because you
need to talk to the patient, coordinate
with the other doctor, figure out what
model to use. And that finally, um, and
this is the scary part of it, new
technologies can change relative wages.
So if it partly substitutes for what
people do often they keep their jobs by
their relative wages falling and that's
um part of what we've seen um the
increase in inequality over the last
many decades. So all of those forces
have kept it so that at any point in
time about 96% of the people who want to
work can work and that's been true you
know most every year for a very long
time now you know except in a recession
or something dysfunctional
largely if you've seen something for 100
years my first bet would be to assume it
happens for the next hundred I know a
set of stories under which the future
will be different from the past a lot of
them in the labor market go under the
story of horses
where every argument I just said applied
100 years ago, but yet now you know, you
know, 300 horses would have as much
horsepower as your car, but I don't
think even for free you would take 300
horses um over a car in some
>> children. I have some children who would
make that deal, but I would advise them
against it. So that's the other side of
the story is sometimes things are
discontinuous, but there are so many
powerful economic forces that have
worked for a long time that I'm going to
still emphasize them um in my teaching
even if my co-teer is more visionary and
feels otherwise.
>> All right. Well, on that note, I think
you have to go teach that class. So
Jason Ferman, thank you for joining me.
>> Thanks for having me.
[Music]